The Moon is the only natural satellite of the Earth[d][7] and 
the fifth largest moon in the Solar System. It is the 
largest natural satellite of a planet in the Solar System 
relative to the size of its primary,[e] having 27% the 
diameter and 60% the density of Earth, resulting in 1⁄81 
its mass. Among satellites with known densities, the Moon 
is the second densest, after Io, a satellite of Jupiter.

The Moon is in synchronous rotation with Earth, always 
showing the same face with its near side marked by dark volcanic 
maria that fill between the bright ancient crustal highlands 
and the prominent impact craters. It is the brightest object 
in the sky after the Sun, although its surface is actually 
dark, with a reflectance just slightly higher than that of 
worn asphalt. Its prominence in the sky and its regular cycle of 
phases have, since ancient times, made the Moon an important 
cultural influence on language, calendars, art and mythology. 
The Moon's gravitational influence produces the ocean tides 
and the minute lengthening of the day. The Moon's current 
orbital distance, about thirty times the diameter of the Earth, 
causes it to appear almost the same size in the sky as the 
Sun, allowing it to cover the Sun nearly precisely in total 
solar eclipses. This matching of apparent visual size is 
a coincidence. The Moon's linear distance from the Earth 
is currently increasing at a rate of 3.82±0.07 cm per year, 
but this rate is not constant.[8]
The Moon is thought to have formed nearly 4.5 billion 
years ago, not long after the Earth. 
Although there have been several hypotheses for its origin 
in the past, the current most widely accepted explanation is that 
the Moon formed from the debris left over after a giant impact 
between Earth and a Mars-sized body.

The Moon is the only celestial body other than Earth on which 
humans have set foot. The Soviet Union's Luna programme was 
the first to reach the Moon with unmanned spacecraft in 1959; 
the United States' NASA Apollo program achieved the only manned 
missions to date, beginning with the first manned lunar orbiting
 mission by Apollo 8 in 1968, and six manned lunar landings between 
1969 and 1972, with the first being Apollo 11. These missions 
returned over 380 kg of lunar rocks, which have been used 
to develop a geological understanding of the Moon's origins,
 the formation of its internal structure, and its subsequent 
history.

After the Apollo 17 mission in 1972, the Moon has 
been visited only by unmanned spacecraft, notably by the 
final Soviet Lunokhod rover. Since 2004, Japan, China, India, 
the United States, and the European Space Agency have each sent 
lunar orbiters. These spacecraft have contributed to confirming 
the discovery of lunar water ice in permanently shadowed craters
 at the poles and bound into the lunar regolith. Future manned 
missions to the Moon have been planned, including government as 
well as privately funded efforts. The Moon remains, under the 
Outer Space Treaty, free to all nations to explore for 
peaceful purposes.
